# Seurat + FICTURE analytical strategy

## Step 2b. Infer cell type factors using Seurat

This example illustrates infering cell type factors using Seurat. This process contains two stops, which require manual evaluation. One stop is at step 2b.2 and the other at step 2b.4. 

Since this step, the output files will be stored at `${model_dir}`, which is defined as `${output_dir}/${train_model}`.

**Prefix**:

This documentation uses the following prefixes to illustrate input and output filenames, which are automatically assigned by the script.

The `nf` will be determined in step2b.5

```
hexagon_prefix="${prefix}.hexagon.${sf}.d_${tw}"
train_prefix="${prefix}.${sf}.nF${nf}.d_${tw}.s_${ep}"    
```

### step 2b.1 Create hexagonal spatial gene expression (SGE) matrix and test different cutoffs for nFeature_RNA
This step creates hexagonal spatial gene expression (SGE) matrix that is compatible with Seurat. It analyzes the distribution of Ncount and Nfeature, and tests filtering the SGE using different nFeature_RNA cutoffs, including 50, 100, 200, 300, 400, 500, 750, and 1000.

Input & Output
```
# Input:
${output_dir}/${prefix}.merged.matrix.tsv.gz
${output_dir}/${prefix}.feature.tsv.gz

# Output: 
# * Hexagonal SGE: 
        ${model_dir}/features.tsv.gz
        ${model_dir}/barcodes.tsv.gz
        ${model_dir}/matrix.mtx.gz
# * Evaluation files: 
        ${model_dir}/Ncount_Nfeature_vln.png
        ${model_dir}/nFeature_RNA_dist.png
        # * for each cut off ${cutoff} in 50, 100, 200, 300, 400, 500, 750, and 1000:
                ${model_dir}/nFeature_RNA_cutoff${cutoff}.png
```

Command:
```
$neda_dir/steps/step2b.1-creat-hexagons-for-Seurat.sh $input_configfile
```

### step 2b.2 Manually select the cutoffs

Examine the density plots generated by `step2b-Seurat-01-hexagon.sh` to choose a cutoff for nFeature_RNA, aiming to remove noise signals. For our example data, we applied a cut off of 500 for deep sequencing data, and 100 for shallow sequencing data. 

It is optional to define x y ranges. 

Add those variables to the `input_data_and_params` file.

Example:
```
# In this case, the Y_max is not applied. 
nFeature_RNA_cutoff=100
X_min=2.5e+06
X_max=1e+07
Y_min=1e+06
```

### step 2b.3 Seurat clustering analysis
The `Seurat_analysis.R` script, by default, evaluates clustering at various resolutions, specifically 0.25, 0.5, 0.75, 1, 1.25, 1.5, and 1.75. 

For each resolution level, it creates a Dimensionality Reduction and Spatial plot to illustrate the clusters through Uniform Manifold Approximation and Projection (UMAP) along with their spatial distribution. It also produces a Differential Expression (DE) file that lists the marker genes for each cluster.

Additionally, this step generates a metadata file containing information on the cluster assignment for each hexagon, and an RDS file that stores the complete Seurat object with all the compiled data.

Input & Output
```
# Input: 
${model_dir}/features.tsv.gz
${model_dir}/barcodes.tsv.gz
${model_dir}/matrix.mtx.gz

#Output: 
# * A metadata file:
        ${model_dir}/${prefix}_cutoff${nFeature_RNA_cutoff}_metadata.csv
# * An RDS file:
        ${model_dir}/${prefix}_cutoff${nFeature_RNA_cutoff}_SCT.RDS
# * For each resolution (`$res`) in 0.25, 0.5, 0.75, 1, 1.25, 1.5, and 1.75:
        ${model_dir}/${prefix}_cutoff${nFeature_RNA_cutoff}_res${res}_DE.csv
        ${model_dir}/${prefix}_cutoff${nFeature_RNA_cutoff}_res${res}_DimSpatial.png
```

Command:
```
$neda_dir/steps/step2b.3-Seurat-clustering.sh $input_configfile
```

### step 2b.4 Manually select the resolution for clustering
Examine the Dimensionality Reduction and Spatial plots from the previous step and choose a resolution to continue with. Then, save this chosen resolution into the `input_data_and_params` file as the res_of_interest variable. 

Example:
```
res_of_interest=1
```

### step 2b.5 Prepare a count matrix with the selected resolution
Transform the metadata into a count matrix to serve as the model matrix for the subsequent step. 

Additionally, the number of clusters from the model matrix will be obtained and assigned to the `nf` variable in the `input_data_and_params` file.

Input & Output
```
#Input:
${model_dir}/features.tsv.gz
${model_dir}/barcodes.tsv.gz
${model_dir}/matrix.mtx.gz
${model_dir}/${prefix}_cutoff${nFeature_RNA_cutoff}_metadata.csv

#Output: 
${model_dir}/${train_prefix}.model.tsv.gz
```

Command:
```
$neda_dir/steps/step2b.5-Seurat-count-matrix.sh $input_configfile
```
